HDF5 standards for input data and parameter values (#19)
sebapersson/petab_sciml: docs/src/format.md

The schema is provided as [JSON schema](assets/input_data_schema.json). Currently, validation is only provided via the PEtab SciML library.

As with [parameters](@ref hdf5_ps_structure), the indexing depends on the NN library:

- NN models in the PEtab SciML [YAML format](@ref NN_YAML) follow PyTorch indexing. For example, if the first layer is `Conv2d`, the input should be in `(C, W, H)` format.
- NN models in other formats follow the indexing and naming conventions of the respective package and programming language.

!!! tip "For developers: Respect memory order"
    Tools supporting the SciML extension should, for computational efficiency, reorder input data and potential layer parameter arrays to match the memory ordering of the target language. For example, PEtab.jl converts input data to follow Julia based indexing.

### [NN model YAML format](@id NN_YAML)

The `petab_sciml` library provides a NN model YAML format for model exchange. This format follows PyTorch conventions for layer names and arguments. The schema is provided as [JSON schema](assets/nn_model_schema.json), which enables validation with various third-party tools.

!!! tip "For users: Define models in PyTorch"

>     The recommended approach to create a NN model YAML file is to first define a PyTorch model (`torch.nn.Module`) and use the Python `petab_sciml` library to export this to YAML. See the tutorials for examples of this.

Reviewer: Good tip!

- `$inputArgumentIndex`: The input argument number in the NN forward function. Starts from 0.
- `$inputIndex` Indexing into the input argument ([syntax](@ref mapping_table_indexing)). Should not be specified if the input is a file.

For [static hybridization](@ref hybrid_types) NN input PEtab identifiers are considered valid PETAB\_IDs without restrictions (e.g., they may be referenced in the parameters table, condition table, hybridization table, etc.). For [dynamic hybridization](@ref hybrid_types), input PEtab identifiers can only be assigned an expression in the [hybridization table](@ref hybrid_table).

#### Outputs

The model Id `$nnId.outputs{[outputArgumentIndex]{[$outputIndex]}}` refers to specific outputs of a NN identified by `$nnId`.

- `$outputId`: The output argument number in the NN forward function. Starts from 0.
- `$outputIndex`: Indexing into the output argument ([syntax](@ref mapping_table_indexing))

#### Nested Identifiers

The PEtab SciML extension supports nested identifiers for mapping structured or hierarchical elements. Identifiers are expressed in the hierarchical indicated above using nested curly brackets. Valid examples are:

> - `nn1.parameters`

Reviewer: Why nn1 and not nn?

Author: Just that, so far in this document, we append numbers to terms to make it clear that the term is an example PEtab identifier, e.g. `conditionId1`, `inputId1`, `layerId1`, `conv1`, so I used `nn1` here too. I think it's nice like this but also fine for me to change this to `nn` if you prefer, since the format of this nested identifier is immediately above it.

Reviewer: Fair, then continue to use `nn1`

- **layers**: Defines the network layers, each with a unique identifier.
- **forward**: A forward pass function that, given input arguments, specifies the order in which layers are called, applies any activation functions, and returns one or several arrays. The forward function can accept more than one input argument (`n > 1`), and in the [mapping table](@ref mapping_table), the forward function's `n`th input argument (ignoring any potential class arguments such as `self`) is referred to as `inputArgumentIndex{n-1}`. Similar holds for the output. Aside from the neural network output values, every component that should be visible to other parts of the PEtab SciML problem must be defined elsewhere (e.g., in **layers**).

### [Neural Network Parameter Values](@id hdf5_ps_structure)

> Parameter values of frozen or pre-trained layers, or post-calibration parameter values, are stored in the HDF5 format, and included in the problem via the problem [YAML file](@ref YAML_file). The HDF5 file should contain a list of entries, where each entry specifies the parameter values for a single layer. Each parameter value includes the name of the parameter as well, e.g. `weight` for the weight matrix parameter of a PyTorch Linear module (`framework_parameter_name`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parameter values for frozen or pre‑trained layers and post‑calibration parameters are stored in HDF5 format and and included in the problem via the [YAML file](@ref YAML_file). The HDF5 file must contain a list of entries, each representing a single layer. For each layer, the parameter array identifier(s) (e.g., `weight` and optionally `bias` for a PyTorch `Linear` layer) and their values must be provided.
```

Author: Should
> (e.g., `weight` and optionally `bias` for a PyTorch `Linear` layer)

instead be
> (e.g., `weight` and/or `bias` for a PyTorch `Linear` layer)

?

i.e. it's fine to only supply one of these, right?

Reviewer: No, because weight is mandatory for a Linear layer, while bias is optional.

Author: Yes, but the weight can be trained? e.g. maybe the user only wants to transfer the bias from a previous run, but re-train the weight. Or do we exclude this possibility?

Reviewer: Ahh good point, but this is excluded, as currently in the parameter table section it is stated that freezing a layer is not allowed.

Author: Let's say I have a foundation model that extracts information from images of cells (e.g. width, circumference, roundness, neighbors, ...). And now I want to use it to specify the initial condition of an ODE system.

There will be the foundation model that extracts information, and the contextualizing model that generates the mechanistic-model--specific initial condition.
Do I need to keep these components separated as distinct models, in order to use the frozen foundation model with different mechanistic models? i.e.
```
image -> foundation model (frozen) -> contextualizing model (trained) -> ODE initial condition
```

Fine for me but maybe we could provide an example in the docs, so people can see that frozen layers are possible, if the user separates them into separate ML models.

---

But if this is possible, why not simply allow frozen layers or parameters?

The docs do state the freezing a layer is not possible, but it looks like a contradiction. The docs also state
> When parsing, deeper nested levels (e.g., netId.layerId) have precedence for nominal values, priors, etc.

If we have this idea of "deeper nested levels", why doesn't it apply to `estimate` too? Seems weird to me that I can specify layer-specific priors, but not layer-specific freezing.

Reviewer: This will be a bit of a pain to implement, but you have a valid point. Frozen layers, and even frozen arrays, is something we should allow. Feel free to remove that it is now allowed in the spec, and I will put it on my TODO to add appropriate test-cases.

Below is an example.
```hdf5
parameters.hdf5                    # arbitrary filename
├── layerId1                       # a layer ID
│   ├─┬─ framework_parameter_name  # reserved keyword (string)
│   │ └─ value                     # reserved keyword (tensor)
│   ├─┬─ framework_parameter_name
│   │ └─ value
│   └─── ...
├── layerId2
│   └─── ...
└── ...
```

The schema is provided as [JSON schema](assets/parameter_data_schema.json). Currently, validation is only provided via the PEtab SciML library.

> The indexing convention and naming for `arrayId` depend on the neural network model library:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The indexing convention and naming for `framework_parameter_name` depend on the neural network model library:
```

│   │ └─ value
│   └─── ...
├── layerId2
│   └─── ...
└── ...
```

The schema is provided as [JSON schema](assets/parameter_data_schema.json). Currently, validation is only provided via the PEtab SciML library.

The indexing convention and naming for `framework_parameter_name` depends on the neural network model library:

- Neural network models in the PEtab SciML [YAML format](@ref YAML_net_format) follow PyTorch indexing and naming conventions. For example, in a PyTorch `Linear` layer, the arrays Ids are `weight` and/or `bias`
- Neural network models in other formats follow the indexing and naming conventions of the respective package and programming language.

!!! tip "For developers: Allow export of parameters in PEtab SciML format"
    If the neural network is not provided in the YAML format, exchange of network parameters between software is not possible. To facilitate exchange, it is recommended that tools supporting PEtab SciML implement a function capable of exporting to the PEtab SciML format if all layers in the neural network correspond to layers supported by the PEtab SciML YAML neural network format.

### [Neural Network Input Data](@id hdf5_input_structure)

> Array input data for neural network models is specified in HDF5 format. Each HDF5 file should contain a list of entries, where each entry associates an input Id with datasets. Each dataset consists of the data array and, optionally, the experiment Ids to which it applies. If no experiment Ids are provided, the dataset will be applied to all experiments. Multiple datasets may not be assigned to the same input for a single experiment.

Reviewer 2: There should probably be a statement that if experiment ids are specified there needs to be an assignment for each experiment id.

Wouldn't it be more consistent to do this at the level of conditions – I do see pros and cons for either option.

> Array input data for neural network models is specified in HDF5 format. Each HDF5 file should contain a list of entries, where each entry associates an input Id with datasets. Each dataset consists of the data array and, optionally, the experiment Ids to which it applies. If no experiment Ids are provided, the dataset will be applied to all experiments. Multiple datasets may not be assigned to the same input for a single experiment.

Author: > Wouldn't it be more consistent to do this at the level of conditions – I do see pros and cons for either option.

Yes you're right, since we say that NN outputs are specified on the level of conditions, then it makes sense to define their inputs on the level of conditions too. Will switch to conditions then.

> There should probably be a statement that if ~~experiment~~ condition ids are specified there needs to be an assignment for each ~~experiment~~ condition id.

Do you mean each condition ID where the neural network output is relevant, or for all condition IDs?
I think we currently support assigning neural network outputs for only a subset of conditions, so I think we only need to require neural network inputs for that subset of conditions. But yes, I will add this clarification explicitly.

> Array input data for neural network models is specified in HDF5 format. Each HDF5 file should contain a list of entries, where each entry associates an input Id with datasets. Each dataset consists of the data array and, optionally, the experiment Ids to which it applies. If no experiment Ids are provided, the dataset will be applied to all experiments. Multiple datasets may not be assigned to the same input for a single experiment.

Reviewer: > I think we currently support assigning neural network outputs for only a subset of conditions, so I think we only need to require neural network inputs for that subset of conditions. 

This is correct, and another thing I have to add tests for.

!!! tip "For developers: Allow export of parameters in PEtab SciML format"
    If the neural network is not provided in the YAML format, exchange of network parameters between software is not possible. To facilitate exchange, it is recommended that tools supporting PEtab SciML implement a function capable of exporting to the PEtab SciML format if all layers in the neural network correspond to layers supported by the PEtab SciML YAML neural network format.

### [Neural Network Input Data](@id hdf5_input_structure)

> Input data for ML models are specified in the HDF5 format. The HDF5 file should contain a list of entries, where each entry specifies an input ID and the datasets for that input ID. Each dataset is the data itself, and optionally the experiment IDs that the data applies to. If no experiment IDs are specified, then the dataset will be utilized in all experiments. A single input cannot be assigned multiple datasets for the same experiment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Array input data for neural network models is specified in HDF5 format. Each HDF5 file should contain a list of entries, with each entry defining an input Id and its associated datasets. Each dataset consists of the data array and, optionally, the experiment Ids to which it applies. If no experiment Ids are provided, the dataset will be applied to all experiments. Multiple datasets may not be assigned to the same input for a single experimental condition.
```

!!! tip "For developers: Respect memory order"
    Tools supporting the SciML extension should, for computational efficiency, reorder input data and potential layer parameter arrays to match the memory ordering of the target language. For example, PEtab.jl converts input data to follow Julia based indexing.

### [YAML Network file format](@id YAML_net_format)

> The `petab_sciml` library provides a YAML neural network file format for model exchange. The YAML format follows PyTorch conventions for layer names and arguments. The schema is provided as [JSON schema](assets/mlmodel_schema.json), which enables easy validation with various third-party tools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `petab_sciml` library provides a YAML neural network file format for model exchange. The YAML format follows PyTorch conventions for layer names and arguments. The schema is provided as [JSON schema](assets/mlmodel_schema.json), which enables validation with various third-party tools.
```
